.TH FRESHCHECK 1 "2026-04-27" "logicutils 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
freshcheck \- decide whether a target file is fresh relative to its dependencies
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B freshcheck
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fITARGET\fR [\fIDEPENDENCY\fR...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B freshcheck
inspects \fITARGET\fR and its \fIDEPENDENCY\fR files and decides whether the
target is up\-to\-date. The decision is reported via the exit status alone, so
that the command can be chained with shell short\-circuit operators in
makefiles, justfiles, or hand\-written scripts.

The freshness criterion is selected with one or more
.B \-\-method
flags. Multiple methods are combined with
.BR \-\-combine .
Hash and checksum based decisions are persisted in a content store
(default
.IR .lu\-store/ )
managed by
.BR stamp (1).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-method= METHOD
Comparison method: \fItimestamp\fR, \fIhash\fR, \fIchecksum\fR, \fIsize\fR,
or \fIalways\fR. May be repeated.
.TP
.BI \-\-hash\-algo= ALGO
Hash algorithm when \fB\-\-method=hash\fR: \fIblake3\fR (default) or \fIsha3\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-checksum\-algo= ALGO
Checksum algorithm when \fB\-\-method=checksum\fR: \fIcrc32\fR (default),
\fIcrc64\fR (gated by the \fIcrc64\fR Cargo feature), or \fIcrc128\fR
(gated by the \fIcrc128\fR Cargo feature).
.TP
.BI \-\-combine= MODE
How to combine multiple methods: \fIany\fR (stale if any method says stale)
or \fIall\fR (default; stale only if every method agrees).
.TP
.BI \-\-store= PATH
Content store path. Defaults to
.IR .lu\-store/ .
.TP
.B \-\-protocol\-version
Print the CLI protocol version and exit.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Target is fresh.
.TP
.B 1
Target is stale (or missing).
.TP
.B 2
Error (bad arguments, I/O failure, store corruption).
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Recompile a C file only when its hash differs from the recorded one:
.PP
.RS
.nf
%.o: %.c
\t@freshcheck \-\-method=hash $@ $< || $(CC) \-c $< \-o $@
\t@stamp record $@
.fi
.RE
.PP
Combine timestamp and size with OR semantics:
.PP
.RS
.nf
freshcheck \-\-method=timestamp \-\-method=size \-\-combine=any out.bam in.fastq
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR stamp (1),
.BR lu\-deps (1),
.BR lu\-rule (1)
.SH AUTHOR
NEWSNIPER.
