.TH LU\-KB 5 "2026-05-13" "logicutils 0.7.0 (v0.x\-smt)" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
lu\-kb \- logicutils knowledge\-base language
.SH DESCRIPTION
The logicutils knowledge base is an indentation\-sensitive language
combining deductive, abductive, and constraint logic programming with a
small functional core. KB files are read by
.BR lu\-query (1)
and may be referenced from rule files consumed by
.BR lu\-rule (1).

A module is a sequence of top\-level
.IR items :
fact blocks, rule blocks, abductive blocks, constraint blocks, type
declarations, function definitions, relation declarations, instance
declarations, and import or export directives.

.SH SYNTAX
.SS Lexical structure
Lines beginning with
.B #
are comments. Indentation, expressed in spaces or tabs consistently
within a file, opens and closes blocks the same way Python does:
deeper lines belong to the immediately preceding header line.

.SS Facts
.RS
.nf
fact depends:
    main.o <\- main.c
    main.o <\- header.h
.fi
.RE
.PP
Each line in a fact block is a directed pair
.I "head <\- arg1 arg2 ..."
that is added to the predicate named on the
.B fact
line.

.SS Rules
.RS
.nf
rule stale(Target):
    depends(Target, Dep)
    newer(Dep, Target)
.fi
.RE
.PP
A rule head is followed by a body of goals. Goals are predicate calls,
.B not
goals, conditions, or
.B let
bindings. Variables begin with an uppercase letter; ground values are
identifiers, integers, floats, booleans, or strings.

.SS Abduction
.RS
.nf
abduce missing_source(File):
    depends(Target, File)
    not exists(File)
    explain "source file may need generation"
.fi
.RE

.SS Constraints
.RS
.nf
constraint valid_alignment(x: SampleId, y: Reference):
    x != y
    exists("{x}.fastq")
.fi
.RE

.SS Functions
.RS
.nf
fn align_cmd(sample, ref):
    "bwa mem {ref}.fa {sample}.fastq"
.fi
.RE
Pipelines use the
.B |>
operator and lambdas use
.IB args " => " expr \fR.\fP

.SS Types
.RS
.nf
type SampleId = String where matches("[A\-Z]{2}[0\-9]+")

data AlignResult:
    bam_path: Path
    quality:  Float where value >= 0.0
.fi
.RE

.SS Relations and instances
Relations are multi\-parameter type relations. Instances may be
declared outside the relation block, may host nested instances under a
.B where
clause, and inherit the constraints of every enclosing instance.

.RS
.nf
relation Processable(Input, Output, Engine):
    fn process(input: Input, engine: Engine) \-> Output

instance Processable(Dataset, Model, GPU):
    fn process(data, engine):
        train(data)

    instance Batchable(Dataset, Model) where Engine == GPU:
        fn batch_size(input): estimate_vram(input)
.fi
.RE

.SS Imports
.RS
.nf
import bio.alignment (align, index)
import utils.paths as P
.fi
.RE
.B import
may also appear inside any block, in which case its bindings are scoped
to that block.

.SH SMT EXTENSIONS (v0.x\-smt)
The
.B v0.x\-smt
branch extends lu\-kb with constructs needed to drive the adsmt SMT
solver, while remaining a strict superset of v0.2 syntax.

.SS Higher\-kinded type parameters
Relation parameters may carry a kind annotation for HKT support:
.RS
.nf
relation Functor(F : Type \-> Type):
    fn map(f: A \-> B, fa: F(A)) \-> F(B)

relation Bifunctor(F(_, _)):
    fn bimap(f: A \-> C, g: B \-> D, fab: F(A, B)) \-> F(C, D)
.fi
.RE
The slot form
.B F(_)
is sugar for
.IR "F : Type -> Type" ;
.B F(_, _)
for
.IR "Type -> Type -> Type" ,
and so on. Kind annotations are optional; inference picks the
smallest kind that makes the relation well\-formed.

.SS Functional dependencies
Relations may declare functional dependencies between their
parameters with a vertical bar after the parameter list:
.RS
.nf
relation Processable(Input, Output, Engine) | Input, Engine \-> Output:
    fn process(input: Input, engine: Engine) \-> Output
.fi
.RE

.SS Overlapping instances
The default coherence check rejects two instance heads that unify.
The
.B overlap
keyword opts in to allowing such a pair:
.RS
.nf
overlap instance Eq(List(A)) where Eq(A):
    fn eq(xs, ys): list_eq(eq, xs, ys)
.fi
.RE

.SS Abductive output
The existing
.B abduce
block drives adsmt's abductive engine. The
.B explain
string threads directly to the solver's abductive output and to the
Lean4
.B smt_abduce
tactic's hole annotation.

.SS Finite enums (v0.5)
The
.B enum
block declares a finite-cardinality sum type whose constructors are
disjoint and exhaustive. Each constructor is nullary.
.RS
.nf
enum Color:
    Red
    Green
    Blue
.fi
.RE
The adsmt backend exposes
.B Color
to its
.B Datatypes
theory with cardinality 3, contributes that bound to polite
combination, and rejects assertions like
.BR "Red = Green" .
The existing
.B data
block remains the product/record form; use
.B enum
when every constructor is nullary and the type is meant to be finite.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR lu\-query (1),
.BR lu\-rule (1)
.SH AUTHOR
NEWSNIPER.
