.TH LU\-QUEUE 1 "2026-04-27" "logicutils 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
lu\-queue \- unified interface to local and cluster job queues
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lu\-queue submit
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fICOMMAND\fR [\fIARG\fR...]
.br
.B lu\-queue status
\fIJOBID\fR
.br
.B lu\-queue wait
\fIJOBID\fR...
.br
.B lu\-queue cancel
\fIJOBID\fR...
.br
.B lu\-queue list
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B lu\-queue
abstracts over a small set of job queue backends. Submitting a job
prints its identifier on standard output so that shell scripts can
capture it into a variable and pass it to subsequent
.B \-\-deps
flags, building dependency graphs out of nothing more than shell
substitution.

The local engine schedules jobs in worker threads of the current
process. The cluster engines (compiled in via Cargo features) translate
the generic options into the corresponding native flags
.RB ( "sbatch" ", " "qsub" ).
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B submit
Submit \fICOMMAND\fR. Prints the job identifier.
.TP
.B status
Print one of \fIpending\fR, \fIrunning\fR, \fIdone\fR, or \fIfailed\fR.
.TP
.B wait
Block until each named job has reached a terminal state.
.TP
.B cancel
Cancel one or more jobs.
.TP
.B list
List every known job and its status.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-engine= ENGINE
\fIlocal\fR (default), \fIslurm\fR, \fIsge\fR, or \fIpbs\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-slots= N
Number of CPU slots requested.
.TP
.BI \-\-mem= SIZE
Memory request, e.g.
.IR 8G .
.TP
.BI \-\-time= DURATION
Wall\-clock limit, e.g.
.IR 2h30m .
.TP
.BI \-\-deps= JOBID,...
Wait for the listed jobs before starting.
.SH EXIT STATUS
0 on success, 1 if a queried job failed, 2 on error.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR lu\-par (1)
.SH AUTHOR
NEWSNIPER.
