.TH LU\-QUERY 1 "2026-04-27" "logicutils 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
lu\-query \- evaluate queries against a logic knowledge base
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lu\-query
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIQUERY\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B lu\-query
loads zero or more knowledge\-base files, optionally augmented with
inline facts, and evaluates \fIQUERY\fR. \fIQUERY\fR has the form
\fIpredicate(arg1, arg2, ...)\fR where each argument is a literal value
or a variable (an identifier that begins with an uppercase letter).
Solutions are printed as bindings of the query variables.

The built\-in engine is a deductive Prolog\-like solver. The
.B \-\-engine
flag delegates to an external binary that adheres to the same CLI
contract; this is the documented extension point for swapping the logic
engine without changing the rest of the toolchain.

The KB language is described in
.BR lu\-kb (5).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-kb= FILE
Knowledge\-base file. Repeatable.
.TP
.BI \-\-fact \  "PRED(ARG,...)"
Inline ground fact. Repeatable.
.TP
.B \-\-all
Print every solution. Without this flag only the first solution is
returned.
.TP
.BI \-\-engine= "builtin|PATH"
Use the built\-in engine (default) or delegate to the external binary at
\fIPATH\fR.
.TP
.BI \-\-timeout= SECONDS
Abort the query after \fISECONDS\fR seconds.
.TP
.BI \-\-format= FORMAT
Output format: \fIplain\fR, \fIjson\fR, \fItsv\fR, \fIcsv\fR, \fItoml\fR,
\fIshell\fR.
.SH EXIT STATUS
0 if at least one solution exists, 1 if no solutions, 2 on error.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Find every stale target according to a project KB:
.PP
.RS
.nf
lu\-query \-\-kb project.kb \-\-all \(aqstale(T)\(aq
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR lu\-rule (1),
.BR lu\-kb (5)
.SH AUTHOR
NEWSNIPER.
