.TH STAMP 1 "2026-05-07" "logicutils 0.2.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
stamp \- record, query, and reconcile file signatures in a content store
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B stamp record
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIFILE\fR...
.br
.B stamp query
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIFILE\fR...
.br
.B stamp diff
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIFILE\fR...
.br
.B stamp gc
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B stamp
manages an on\-disk content store (default
.IR .lu\-store/ )
that maps file paths to their cryptographic and structural signatures.

The store is a *nested hash table* in the sense of Ticki's collision
resolution scheme. At every depth a slot is selected by an FNV\-1a\-64
hash whose seed has been mixed with the depth, giving an effectively
independent hash family. Each slot is either a leaf JSON file
(\fB<NN>.json\fR) or, if a collision occurred there, a subtree directory
(\fB<NN>/\fR) holding the next level of the table. Inserting a key that
collides with an existing leaf turns that leaf into a subtree and
re\-distributes both entries one level deeper. Most paths terminate at
depth 0; the disk layout never grows wider than 256 slots per node and
never deeper than the longest collision chain.

A
.I .format
marker file at the store root pins the schema version
.RB ( v2 ).
The first time
.B stamp
or
.BR freshcheck (1)
touches a store that lacks the marker, any v0.1 (flat\-fanout) entries
present in the directory are transparently migrated into the v0.2
layout and the marker is written.

.B stamp
is the storage backend used by
.BR freshcheck (1)
and may be invoked directly to inspect or repair the store.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B record
Compute signatures for the given files using \fB\-\-method\fR and persist
them. Existing entries are merged.
.TP
.B query
Print recorded signatures for the given files in the chosen output format.
Files with no recorded signature are skipped silently; pair with
\fB\-\-format=plain\fR for human reading.
.TP
.B diff
Compare the current contents of each file to the recorded signature.
Output one line per file describing whether it is unchanged, changed,
or missing from the store.
.TP
.B gc
Remove store entries whose underlying files no longer exist.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-method= METHOD
Signature method: \fIhash\fR, \fIchecksum\fR, \fIsize\fR, \fItimestamp\fR.
May be repeated to record several signatures per file.
.TP
.BI \-\-hash\-algo= ALGO
.BI \-\-checksum\-algo= ALGO
Same meanings as in
.BR freshcheck (1).
.TP
.BI \-\-store= PATH
Store directory.
.TP
.BI \-\-format= FORMAT
Output format: \fIplain\fR, \fIjson\fR, \fItsv\fR, \fIcsv\fR, \fItoml\fR,
\fIshell\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-protocol\-version
Print the CLI protocol version and exit.
.SH EXIT STATUS
0 on success, 1 if a queried file has no record (or
.B diff
finds a mismatch),
2 on error.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I .lu\-store/
Default store directory. Created on first use.
.TP
.I .lu\-store/[<NN>/...]<NN>.json
Per\-path signature file. The component just before
.I .json
is the slot index (1 byte hex) at the leaf's depth; preceding
.I <NN>/
components are subtree directories created by collisions.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR freshcheck (1),
.BR lu\-deps (1)
.SH AUTHOR
NEWSNIPER.
